# Informal Meeting 21.04.2026

## Problem Definition

By general scaling laws, a higher-dimensional input and higher-capacity model will be able to extract more meaningful signal, given enough signal is contained in the dataset (e.g. no noise learned/overfitting) and compute resources.

The Gaussian-Splatting approach [1] "compresses" the given input into a lower-dimensional representation. If the input image is highly locally correlated (e.g. not that much noise, few pixel-level details [1]), the original image can be reconstructed relatively lossless (high SSIM) from the output representation. Alternatively, the "compression" (= number of Gaussian primitives) can be adapted to achieve a desired PSNR.

Therefore, when plainly comparing the performance of a GNN with the Gaussian primitives as nodes as input (edges to be determined), it will likely perform not better than state-of-the-art vision models on an e.g. 4k input image dataset. By contrast, these models are likely larger than those using the compressed GNN approach. We therefore believe, that we should make a two-dimensional comparison when evaluating a model, resulting in a sort of efficiency-metric.

1. The performance of the model (e.g. classification accuracy, AUC, ...)
2. The resources required (e.g. model size, compression of the input, sample inference time, ...)

Other goals and metrics are yet to be determined.

## Dataset

The MedMNIST dataset [2] contains many 2D and 3D datasets. We believe that we should start with using 224x224 datasets, as the input of a normal image is in $\Theta(n^2)$ and the input of the "compressed" representation likely as well. With a smaller input dimension, the efficiency benefit of the GNN may be negligible.


### Dataset Preprocessing

The implementation of [3] on GitHub may already contain a ready-to-use script to process the MedMNIST dataset, although we did not check that explicitly.


## Next Meeting

We treat these conclusions as a common understanding baseline for the following formal meeting on 24.04.2026 and will present & further discuss these findings. These findings may have to be adapted again in the broader context of our task and are not set for the future.

## References

[1] Y. Zhang u. a., „Image-GS: Content-Adaptive Image Representation via 2D Gaussians“, arXiv.org. Zugegriffen: 15. April 2026. [Online]. Verfügbar unter: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.01866v2

[2] J. Yang u. a., „MedMNIST v2 -- A large-scale lightweight benchmark for 2D and 3D biomedical image classification“, Sci Data, Bd. 10, Nr. 1, S. 41, Jan. 2023, doi: 10.1038/s41597-022-01721-8.

[3] M. Dannecker u. a., „Fast and Explicit: Slice-to-Volume Reconstruction via 3D Gaussian Primitives with Analytic Point Spread Function Modeling“, arXiv.org. Zugegriffen: 15. April 2026. [Online]. Verfügbar unter: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.11624v2
